Assignment Policies
###################

..  include::  /header.inc

In the past, I have left getting work done up to you. Unfortunately, that often
results in students not keeping up with the course, and doing very poorly on
exams. This term, I am not going to let you put things off. Here are the rules
we will follow for all assignments in the class:

When are Assignments Available?
*******************************

I will post notes and assignments for each week on Sunday before we will be
covering that material. The assignment is available on Sunday and you can start
working on it at that time. Some assignments are ready for you to work as soon
as they are posted, others may need a bit of explaining, which we will do on
our first meeting of the week. Nothing will prevent you from setting up any
code you might need to write, so do that as soon as you can after the
assignment is posted. 

Working on Assignments
**********************

You should push your work to GitHub_ as often as seems reasonable. In most
cases, reasonable means when you feel the need to step away from the project,
either because you are stuck, or you have reached a milestone of some sort.
Never walk away from your workstation without making sure your present work is
safely stored on GitHub_. Think of this as marvelous backup system. If you walk
away and someone steals your machine, at least your work is safe!  You can go
after the thief sure your work is safe!

When Is The Assignment Due?
***************************

All assignments are due on the following Sunday at Midnight. I will check the
work on your Github_ account, and grade it as soon as I can. Here is where
GitHub_ gives us some cool power. After I review your work, I may offer a
chance to improve that work. I will post comments about the work, and the grade
you have so far on Blackboard. If I offer the chance, you can continue working
on the project into the following week with no penalty and improve your work. 

Penalties for Late Work
***********************

If you have nothing worthy of grading in your repository by that first Sunday
at midnight, you can continue to work and submit the project through the second
week after the assignment is posted. However, the highest grade you can earn
now is 80% of the available points. Once again, I may allow you to continue to
work on the assignment for an additional week, but only if I tell you do do so
in comments on Blackboard. 

If you have not submitted some work for me to review by Sunday midnight of the
second week, you will not get credit for that assignment. That means you must
at least start the project within two weeks of the assignment to have a chance
to earn points on that assignment. In this scheme, you will be finished with
each assignment after three weeks max! 

Exceptions
**********

These rules are not absolute. However, you must let me know about circumstances
that may prevent you from completing an assignment before the deadlines, not
after. In most cases, I will adjust dedlines to get you past the situation.
Often this is a job issue, or a family issue, and (as I know too well) a
medical issue.

Rationale
*********

This scheme is not intended to punish you, but, rather, to encourage you to put
the required effort into this class. If this was your job, you would be expected
to get your work done as quickly as you can. No work, No reward! (Or points in
this case!) By keeping up with the work, you stand a much better chance to do
well on the exams! I have seen far too many students do poorly in my classes,
simply because they put things off until it was too late to catch up.


